# How to identify the Root Cause of Database Connection Pooling issues

**What is Database Connection Polling?**
Database Connection Pooling is a technique used to manage database connections efficiently by reusing a set of pre-established connections rather than creating and destroying connections for every request. This improves performance and reduces the overhead of establishing new connections repeatedly.
However, polling issues can arise when connections are not managed properly, leading to various failures, such as connection exhaustion, slow queries, or application crashes.

**Common Database Connection Pooling Issues**

🔴**Issue 1:**

**The application creates too many connections, exceeding the database limit.**

The database may start rejecting new connections, leading to Too many connections or Connection timeout errors.

🔴**Issue 2**

**Application opens database connections but never closes them.**
Leads to a steady increase in open connections, eventually causing database overload.


**Simulating Connection Pooling using Spring Boot and MySQL**
In a Spring Boot application, connection pooling is typically managed using HikariCP, which is the default connection pool implementation in Spring Boot (since version 2.0). This approach ensures efficient database connection management by reusing existing connections rather than creating a new one for every request.
1️⃣ Setup MySQL Database
1.Create a VM in GCP with e2-standard-4 , Ubuntu OS , 30GB Disk size  (Refer the guide -)
2. Connect to VM using SSH
Running the Commands to install and Setup MySQL Server.
```bash
sudo su
apt update
apt install mysql-server -y
```
After installation, start and enable MySQL:
```bash
sudo systemctl start mysql
sudo systemctl enable mysql
vi sudo nano /etc/mysql/mysql.conf.d/mysqld.cnf
```
Find the line:
```bash
bind-address = 127.0.0.1
```
Change it to:
```bash
bind-address = 0.0.0.0
```
2️⃣ Restart MySQL Service
```bash
sudo systemctl restart mysql
```
3️⃣ Create Database and User
Login to MySQL:
```bash
sudo mysql -u root -p
```
Set the password as root
**Run these SQL commands:**
```bash
CREATE DATABASE realbanking;
CREATE USER 'realbank_user'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY 'Password123';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON realbanking.* TO 'realbank_user'@'%';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
EXIT;
sudo systemctl restart mysql
```
**Below are the database details you configured**
Database : realbanking
username: realbank_user
password: password123

